---
name: DIALS core meeting 2022-08-18
tags: core meeting
---

# DIALS core meeting 2022-08-18

## Previous Actions

- [ ] ND to review: TOFBeam - A time-of-flight beam in dxtbx [`cctbx/dxtbx#492`](https://github.com/cctbx/dxtbx/pull/492) ([prev](https://dials.github.io/kb/core/20220303#proposal-for-a-time-of-flight-beam-in-dxtbx))
- [ ] `std::string` support for messagepack. This is used in XFEL module, should try to fix. [`dials/dials#1858`](https://github.com/dials/dials/issues/1858).
    - [ ] Is using pickle until this is fixed, so probably good to do

## Agenda


### Dropping Data Blocks

https://github.com/cctbx/dxtbx/pull/504

- [x] GW PR
 - [x] After PR/PRs, ASB to contact e.g. Mike Wall about this, too. 
 - GW thinks reasonable to merge when these concerns addressed
 - Waiting on AB now, will get sorted as soon as can
- Progress!
    - DataBlock in Lunus is one of the outstanding issues
        - AB Identified scripts, Mike Wall agreed that they should be deprecated
        - **This is Done!** Was entirely in deprecated scripts that weren't being used any more
    - XFEL repos are still WIP
        - [ls49](https://github.com/nksauter/LS49)
        - [cxid9114](https://github.com/dermen/cxid9114) (this should be fixed)


### LCLS XFEL Updates
- [`cctbx/dxtbx#517`](https://github.com/cctbx/dxtbx/pull/517)
- GW suggested Ben to have a look
- **Action**: Add logging to the `except Exception:` so it doesn't silently ignore errors
- [ ] ASB to turn on tests now dials-data changes below merged
- [ ] ASB address DP comments in dials/dials#2110 (I think)
- Probably being treated in future planned hackathon

### `dials.find_bad_pixels`

> ASB: would like to discuss dials.background and noisy pixels -> park on agenda for next meeting. TL;DR - noisy pixels at EU-XFEL, wanted to compare and contrast with find bad pixel code. Confusion: Aaron meant `dials.find_bad_pixels`. MPI enabling, much lower thresholding. Think already uses future parallels? Adjusting threshold could be useful too. 

- Shadow goniometer masking is good, but specialised to one use case
- Need more generic so that we can implement in the dxtbx nexus format class
    - ND: Does this mean NXMX?
        - NXMX does have per image mask, but is a per image mask, no way to generate a dynamic mask
- Goniometer masker is only implementation here
- At EuXFEL used LPD detector
    - Detector rotates between four memory banks. Each memory bank has different noise characteristics depending on the gain mode.
    - Would like a way to dynamically calculate a mask depending on bank and gain mode.
- Under active research, can be dropped for now




### AOB?

### [cctbx/dxtbx#538](https://github.com/cctbx/dxtbx/pull/538) and Zenodo data
- Talking about https://github.com/cctbx/dxtbx/pull/538 and associated data to go into dials-data
- The `incident_wavelength` field is derived by (potentially non-trivial) operations on the wavelength spectra, for each image
- Nexus [Variants](https://manual.nexusformat.org/datarules.html#design-variants) is a mechanism for accessing "Old" version of data for which the current data is derived/refined
- Aaron wants to use this to store the chain of "Derived incident_wavelength" but the original 2D dataset spectra (which is also a valid value for incident_wavelength itself)
- Aaron also wants to _access_ this chain of data, to get the spectra that was used to derive the `incident_wavelength`, to do separate calculations (but the rest of the code should access the derived version of the field)
- (ND interpretation) Essentially: we need a canonical way to access variants in NXmx. This could potentially apply to any field
- Had code issues implementing
    - Seems related to NXmx `_start()` function opening HDF5, reading intial data, then closing link to H5 file
    - If data is read, it's re-opened and then _that_ file handle is Cached
    - Maybe we should just cache the initial handle?




### Next meeting

Thursday, September 1st, 4pm (BST), 8am (PDT)
