---
name: DIALS core meeting 2024-10-17
tags: core meeting
---

# DIALS core meeting 2024-10-17

## Previous Actions

- [ ] **ND** Investigate getting `psana` tests running on the DIALS xfel-regression testing (see Github Actions)
- [ ] **ND**: Sync new releases with current state of dials/cbflib and main branch. Keep synced.
 
## Agenda

### PS2 processing discussion
- Requires Graeme, deferred from several last times
    - Had issues processing PS2 data taken at Diamond
    - Graeme suggests setting up dedicated zoom chat

### Commit notification emails
- [x] **ND**: Get commit notificaton emails working again
    - Discovered misconfigured servers, python 2.7 and some previous manual forked changes to the upstream tool
- It is still not working
- Tested builtin GitHub "Commit notifications"
    - This is noisier as we have no control over branch
    - Is this acceptable?
    - Other fallback is subscribing to "watch" repository
- Can also continue with on TODO list
- Call this done, if this level of verbosity is annoying we can revisit


### Making CMake default for DIALS bootstrap
- ~~https://github.com/dials/dials/pull/2755~~ Merged
- Fixed a set of build errors that have been creeping in
- Fix for libtbx [removals](https://github.com/cctbx/cctbx_project/commit/079f2da03736d72efb520cc2b3df8b472d50b218) that completely broke all our CI/workflows.
- Full libtbx/cctbx still supported with `--libtbx` (and no plans to remove)
- Has been very useful for people to run development builds quicker!

### Github Actions
- ND in progress of migrating CI to github actions
- Getting XFEL-regression working again main TODO, will be able to have as explicit step (less confusing than current)
- Should relieve pressure on azure pipelines limits, make easier to see what is going on
- I like Github Actions! Much nicer to use than Azure/Gitlab
    - Have a walkthrough of new actions scripts at some point

### Handle the case of very few reflections for a given dataset in weighted cosym analysis
- https://github.com/dials/dials/pull/2741
- Broke xfel-regression
- Test actually failed in CI, but showed green tick -> Should fix with Github Actions rewrite
- James will run tests and check fix

### MCD Outlier Rejection
- AB PR: https://github.com/dials/dials/pull/2676
- Relatively happy with, touches xia2.ssx so wanted JBE to look over
- Adds lots of new settings, does not change current defaults but thinks it should do
- ~~JBE will have a look at it~~
    - JBE Has had a look! Has feedback/suggestions
    - AB will have a look, check next time


### Fast-feedback indexer
- Adding the fast-feedback-indexer to DIALS
- https://github.com/dials/dials/pull/2717
    - Conda-forge upstream PR still in progress, HC currently on leave

### Status of James' HDF5 work
- [ ] **JBE**: H5 on-disk experiment: review practicalities of using this & welcome people looking at James's work above. round trip example files could be useful - exists in dials.export.
- https://github.com/dials/dials/pull/2677
- Graeme and Nick need to have a look over
    - Had a look this week, a few changes then look again
    - This solves some problems we have been having
- We need a persuasive argument why we are not using NXreflection
- AB thinks should be NXReflections
    - NXReflections is not an application definition; is a base class
    - Does not want to create a new file format
- GW emphasises that should match the internal representation because is not intended as interchange, storage file should match what we want to read/write
- Long discussion without agreement, parties agree to defer until future discussions.

### Laue-dials tests
- Rick wanted to run these as part of dials test suite - follow up

### PyCBF on PPC
- Derek Mendez queried about getting DIALS build for PPC platform. PyCBF seemed to have issues.
- Autobuild is broken, in process of moving to plain setuptools
- ND: Not had time to continue working on this


### PR: NXmx: read data_scale_factor
- https://github.com/cctbx/dxtbx/pull/756 
- Needed nxmx release
    - **ND**: Make nxmx release and push through to conda-forge.
    - This is done
    - CI errors appear to be legit


### "Add the ellipsoid profile model as an option in dials.stills_process"
- https://github.com/dials/dials/pull/2615


## AOB

### Other PRs





### Next meeting


Due to time zone changes the normal meeting time must change:

Thursday, October 31st, 4pm (GMT), 9am (PDT)

or

Thursday, October 31st, 3pm (GMT), 8am (PDT)

