---
name: DIALS core meeting 2024-09-19
tags: core meeting
---

# DIALS core meeting 2024-09-19

## Previous Actions

- [ ] **ND** Investigate getting `psana` tests running on the DIALS xfel-regression testing
- [ ] **ND**: Investigate using stable-nightly conda builds of cctbx (e.g. cctbx tests) longer term
- [ ] **ND**: Sync new releases with current state of dials/cbflib and main branch. Keep synced.
- [ ] **ND**: Get commit notificaton emails working again
    - This appears to now be working. Combination of misconfigured servers, python 2.7 and some previous manual forked changes to the upstream tool
    - Monitor over next week to check it is working
 
## Agenda

- PS2 processing discussion, requires Graeme, defer to next time.
    - Graeme is still away this week


### MCD Outlier Rejection
- AB PR: https://github.com/dials/dials/pull/2676
- Relatively happy with, touches xia2.ssx so wanted JBE to look over
- Adds lots of new settings, does not change current defaults but thinks it should do
- JBE will have a look at it

### Fast-feedback indexer
- Adding the fast-feedback-indexer to DIALS
- https://github.com/dials/dials/pull/2717

### Status of James' HDF5 work
- [ ] **JBE**: H5 on-disk experiment: review practicalities of using this & welcome people looking at James's work above. round trip example files could be useful - exists in dials.export.
- https://github.com/dials/dials/pull/2677
- Graeme and Nick need to have a look over
- We need a persuasive argument why we are not using NXreflection

### Laue-dials tests
- Rick wanted to run these as part of dials test suite - follow up

### PyCBF on PPC
- Derek Mendez queried about getting DIALS build for PPC platform. PyCBF seemed to have issues.
- Autobuild is broken, in process of moving to plain setuptools
- Also questions about long term CBFlib; this will be addressed soon

## AOB

### PRs
- https://github.com/cctbx/dxtbx/pull/756 - New nexus parameter - needs nxmx release
    - **ND**: Make nxmx release and push through to conda-forge.
- Two Takanori image viewer PRs, merged.

### Next meeting

Thursday, October 3rd, 4pm (BST), 8am (PDT)
