---
name: DIALS core meeting 2025-11-06
tags: core meeting
---

# DIALS core meeting 2025-11-06

## Previous Actions

- [ ] **ND** Investigate getting `psana` tests running on the DIALS xfel-regression testing
- [ ] **ND**: Move dials.diamond.ac.uk to a redirect to dials.github.io
- [ ] **ND**: Remove from DIALS bootstrap [dials/dials#3030](https://github.com/dials/dials/pull/3030)
- [ ] **DGW**: Make issue to discuss moving of dials-data to more appropriate place.


## Agenda

### DIALS Release 3.26
- Out
- .xz size ballooned from 400 MB DIALS 3.24 -> 1.7 GB
- Seems to have pulled in all of CUDA-runtime now?
- It's ffbidx.
- People generally begrudgingly okay with it.

### DIALS Office Hours
- 3pm Thursdays was what we talked about
- ND talk to JBE about running
- Make informal promise for office hours, and a slack channel that people can make known that they have a request to chat/for help about a particular topic
- JBE booked room, not sent out invites/ zoom yet - try to get done in next week.
    - [x] Consider sending reminder to slack day before advertising
    - [x] James to follow up with advert to non-Diamond people as it is happening already at DLS
- Graeme suggested "themes" for the office hours
- James to follow up
- Diamond "User open hours" under discussion
- Talk about having two office hours, AB indicates that this should be possible
    - Some discussion about time offset, suggest 8h off between West/East
- Jame advertised today! There is a weekly reminder in slack now, close this off.

### Metrics

- 2025-09-25 - dxtbx-side merged in, nothing yet in DIALS side to push it into the mtz history https://github.com/cctbx/dxtbx/pull/816
- Needs to be work to put in on DIALS side
- Work to do:
    - Need to package history into MTZ, but MTZ history not the right place. Decided MTZ-appendix is the right place to put this in, but work not started yet
    - Aaron has offered Yang's skills as his work should cover this area
    - [ Write integrate and scale history to MTZ #2924 ](https://github.com/dials/dials/pull/2924)
    - David to dig relevant information out
- MTZ Appendix: Some controversy
    - Phenix/DIALS not included in discussions
    - Fundamental technological issues
        - Mixing MTZ/CIF
- Gemmi supports

### AOAOB
- Hamburg: imageset, sequences, laziness so it works on 100,000 image HDF5 files
- Did some work in a branch to get stills_process to use imagesequences
- Nick did some work to eliminate need for check_format
- All of this is in branches that have not been revisited
- Discussion about still goniometer dogma
- Probably table for new year

### ImageSequence vs ImageSet
- Marko is working on an NXmx-like format class for SerialED, where the beam position changes each image
- It seems not possible to use `ImageSequence` for this, as it does not allow different models per image. Is this correct?
- `ImageSet` works, but import and viewing images is much slower
- Is there a long term plan to converge to just one of these classes, with all performance and feature issues fixed?
- Suggestion to look at DMcD properties table
- Discussion about serialization/deserialization overhead, brief discussion of using another form e.g. hdf5 or sqlite (for Experiment Lists).
- Discussion of existing uses of mixin inheritance

### APS Workshop

- GW had conversation about expanding workshop scope. Was half-day, thought maybe a full day - scope expanded to e.g. serial processing 
- May 4th-8th 2026 two half-days of DIALS workshop probably
- Some travel funding available, potentially from outside US

### MCD outlier rejection

- Discussion about https://github.com/dials/dials/pull/2676, ND connection degraded and had to leave
- Was merged in, AB not 100% convinced but could be useful in some cases.

## AOB

- General offer from Dan Paley for DIALS West to take over any release process work that could be supported
- Note that after new Optuna dependency was added this caused scrambling on DIALS west side, as some separate dependency lists maintained
- PSAna2 PRs
    - https://github.com/cctbx/dxtbx/pull/860
    - https://github.com/dials/dials/pull/3038
    - DIALS East to have a look at in next week


### Next meeting

Thursday, November 20th, 4pm (GMT), 8am (PST), 10am (CST)
