---
name: DIALS core meeting 2025-01-30
tags: core meeting
---

# DIALS core meeting 2025-01-30

## Previous Actions

- [ ] **ND** Investigate getting `psana` tests running on the DIALS xfel-regression testing
- [ ] **ND**: Move dials.diamond.ac.uk to a redirect to dials.github.io

## Agenda

### Python 3.10 and psana

- psana repo: https://github.com/lcls-psana/psana
- cctbx environment for running: https://github.com/cctbx/cctbx_project/tree/master/xfel/conda_envs
- Azure yml: https://github.com/cctbx/cctbx_project/blob/master/.azure-pipelines/xfel/unix-psana-build.yml
- Request to build on anaconda channel lcls-i have been made, undetermined timescales before this is built for python 3.10
- Wait until 3.10 version is available, add to xfel-regression tests, then address long-term situation.
- Modern builds now! Up to 3.11, 3.12 has API issues
- xtc2 daq2 psana2 will be coming, xfel will need to handle these at some point
- See above action item regarding integrating into CI tests, this should be relatively simple now.

### "FormatXTC: add wavelength_fallback parameter"
- https://github.com/cctbx/dxtbx/pull/781
- Was added as PR to dials/dxtbx back in March '24
- I moved it across to cctbx/dxtbx
- Still wanted?
- Set to automerge when tests pass

### Aaron dials web-page PRs
- Aaron wants link to slack channel on webpage
    - Link on front of DIALS README still works, should add this
    - [ ] **ND**: Action: Replace dials-support link with slack link

### General README overhaul
- New grants not listed!
    - Probably an Aaron action
- README somewhat crusty and out of date
- Contact link to slack should be more prominent

### Github Actions
- Aaron would still like to have a walkthrough of new actions scripts at some point
    - Reserve back half of one of these at some point

### MCD Outlier Rejection
Previous:
- AB PR: https://github.com/dials/dials/pull/2676
- Relatively happy with, touches xia2.ssx so wanted JBE to look over
- Adds lots of new settings, does not change current defaults but thinks it should do
- ~~JBE will have a look at it~~
    - JBE Has had a look! Has feedback/suggestions https://github.com/dials/dials/pull/2750
    - AB will have a look
- Probably April
- Drop for now, pick up again in future

### "Add the ellipsoid profile model as an option in dials.stills_process"
- https://github.com/dials/dials/pull/2615
- Status: waiting on Aaron to review, not pressing so likely not in immediate future.
- Probably April
- Drop for now, pick up again in future

### Collaboration Meeting?!

- Sleep this item until End of Feb
- Graeme requested to add
 - AB: Dials workshop in association with a user meeting? Two days workshop two days DIALS perhaps? Discuss!
- [ ] **GW**: Kick off conversation in dials-support about this
    - Discussion started

## AOB

### Dials-support stuff

- Aaron wants to deprecate sourceforge dials-support and move to something with an archive
- TODO: Nick/Graeme work out how to set up on Jiscmail
- Aaron wants a Dials User Group!
    - Name the new mailing list this
    - [ ] ND/GW do this for next time


### Metrics
- Checked PDB, very little proportion of datasets are reported as being DIALS
- ND remembers this discussion at cross-developer meetings from several years ago (GRC?) and metadata gets often lost across processing
- Irakli is working on properly generating metadata for deposition
- Aaron has a new person starting who will also be interested in this



### Next meeting

Thursday, February 13th, 4pm (GMT), 8am (PST), 10am (CST)
