---
name: DIALS core meeting 2025-10-09
tags: core meeting
---

# DIALS core meeting 2025-10-09

## Previous Actions

- [ ] **ND** Investigate getting `psana` tests running on the DIALS xfel-regression testing
- [ ] **ND**: Move dials.diamond.ac.uk to a redirect to dials.github.io

## Agenda

### DIALS Metrics on github.io
- Can play with the [power BI page](https://app.powerbi.com/view?r=eyJrIjoiZWQxYzQ3OGUtZGIwYS00NDZmLTk1YjctNDU1YmViNTI5ZDNjIiwidCI6IjM5NjU3M2NiLWYzNzgtNGI2OC05YmM4LTE1NzU1YzBjNTFmMyIsImMiOjZ9)
- Similar page for deposition incoming, by year / institute etc. - working out now how to integrate with the RST for dials.github.io pages.
- Discussed https://github.com/dials/dials/pull/3000
- With better title/extra newsfragment removed, not reason not to merge
- ND to look at Jenkins job
- Consider github action to generate this

### cctbx.github.io

- https://github.com/cctbx/cctbx.github.io
- was built by jenkins job
- been failing for ~1year with intersphinx errors
- is this a thing that cctbx still cares about/builds elsewhere?
- ND: Make issue and tag Aaron
    - https://github.com/cctbx/cctbx.github.io/issues/1
- Aaron: Billy going to rebuild
- ND: Remove jenkins job that was broken anyway


### DIALS Office Hours
- 3pm Thursdays was what we talked about
- ND talk to JBE about running
- Make informal promise for office hours, and a slack channel that people can make known that they have a request to chat/for help about a particular topic
- JBE booked room, not sent out invites/ zoom yet - try to get done in next week.
    - [ ] Consider sending reminder to slack day before advertising
    - [ ] James to follow up with advert to non-Diamond people as it is happening already at DLS
- Graeme suggested "themes" for the office hours
- James to follow up

### Metrics
- 2025-09-25 - dxtbx-side merged in, nothing yet in DIALS side to push it into the mtz history https://github.com/cctbx/dxtbx/pull/816
- Needs to be work to put in on DIALS side
- Work to do:
    - Need to package history into MTZ, but MTZ history not the right place. Decided MTZ-appendix is the right place to put this in, but work not started yet
    - Aaron has offered Yang's skills as his work should cover this area
    - [ Write integrate and scale history to MTZ #2924 ](https://github.com/dials/dials/pull/2924)
    - David to dig relevant information out

### iota and Prime

- Both developers moved on
- Iota: trouble configuring on recent python versions
- DIALS pulls from conda-forge directly
    - This would be a solution for XFEL
- Prime easier to drop but defer decision
    - Aaron to ask Mona what she wants to do with Prime (still on to-do)

### Additional dependencies
- `reciprocalspaceship` has been requested as a dependency in [PR 3016](https://github.com/dials/dials/pull/3016)
    - Python-only tool which has potential to replace some `iotbx` functionality
    - RSS functionality could be rewritten, does apparently provide useful stuff that could be leveraged later
- general agreement


### AOAOB
- Hamburg: imageset, sequences, laziness so it works on 100,000 image HDF5 files
- Did some work in a branch to get stills_process to use imagesequences
- Nick did some work to eliminate need for check_format
- All of this is in branches that have not been revisited
- Discussion about still goniometer dogma

### ImageSequence vs ImageSet
- Marko is working on an NXmx-like format class for SerialED, where the beam position changes each image
- It seems not possible to use `ImageSequence` for this, as it does not allow different models per image. Is this correct?
- `ImageSet` works, but import and viewing images is much slower
- Is there a long term plan to converge to just one of these classes, with all performance and feature issues fixed?
- Suggestion to look at DMcD properties table
- Discussion about serialization/deserialization overhead, brief discussion of using another form e.g. hdf5 or sqlite (for Experiment Lists).
- Discussion of existing uses of mixin inheritance


### Dials data download failures

- CI failing due to data downloads
- Does dials-data retry?
- ND has recollection that DGW was looking at this?
- Possibly more agressive retention of caches?
- Moved DGW to admin to allow to bypass failures due to incorrect download
- Possibly: Need to check status code on file download?
- Discussion: Worth hosting on LBL?


## AOB

### Neutrons

- AB had email from Aaron Finke to ask about analysis - when a stable DIALS release that supports neutrons
    - DMcD working on last merges
    - Both TOF and Laue being worked on
    - Move this to top of next agenda so can discuss with DMcD available
- AB has task to set up meeting next week, will try to involve interested parties (e.g. David's)

### 

### Next meeting

Thursday, October 23rd, 4pm (BST), 8am (PDT), 10am (CDT)
