---
name: DIALS core meeting 2026-01-15
tags: core meeting
---

# DIALS core meeting 2026-01-15

## Previous Actions

- [ ] **ND** Investigate getting `psana` tests running on the DIALS xfel-regression testing
- [ ] **ND**: Move dials.diamond.ac.uk to a redirect to dials.github.io
- [x] **ND**: Remove from DIALS bootstrap [dials/dials#3030](https://github.com/dials/dials/pull/3030)
- [x] **DGW**: Make issue to discuss moving of dials-data to more appropriate place. --> https://github.com/dials/data/issues/529
- [x] **ND**: Turn off the "Nick needs to start meeting" button for the core meetings

## Agenda

### dials.github.io
- Mac installer link broken
- ND to look into, currently macos tests failing causing the development build not to be deployed
- https://github.com/cctbx/cctbx_project/issues/1119

### Metrics

- 2025-09-25 - dxtbx-side merged in, nothing yet in DIALS side to push it into the mtz history https://github.com/cctbx/dxtbx/pull/816
- Needs to be work to put in on DIALS side
- Work to do:
    - Need to package history into MTZ, but MTZ history not the right place. Decided MTZ-appendix is the right place to put this in, but work not started yet
    - Aaron has offered Yang's skills as his work should cover this area
    - [ Write integrate and scale history to MTZ #2924 ](https://github.com/dials/dials/pull/2924)
    - David to dig relevant information out
- MTZ Appendix: Some controversy
    - Phenix/DIALS not included in discussions
    - Fundamental technological issues
        - Mixing MTZ/CIF
- Gemmi supports
- AB met with BP/DGW/Oleg/Dorothy and talking about MTZ appendix issue
    - Conclusion: Nobody completely happy, AB to approach Clemens and get conversation going
- Dan Paley found issue with profiling and MTZ appendix https://github.com/cctbx/dxtbx/pull/867
    - Agreed looks reasonable
    - Requested David to have a look

### AOAOB

- Probably table for new year
    - It is now new year
- Hamburg: imageset, sequences, laziness so it works on 100,000 image HDF5 files
- Did some work in a branch to get stills_process to use imagesequences
- Nick did some work to eliminate need for check_format
- All of this is in branches that have not been revisited
- Discussion about still goniometer dogma

### ImageSequence vs ImageSet
- Marko is working on an NXmx-like format class for SerialED, where the beam position changes each image
- It seems not possible to use `ImageSequence` for this, as it does not allow different models per image. Is this correct?
- `ImageSet` works, but import and viewing images is much slower
- Is there a long term plan to converge to just one of these classes, with all performance and feature issues fixed?
- Suggestion to look at DMcD properties table
- Discussion about serialization/deserialization overhead, brief discussion of using another form e.g. hdf5 or sqlite (for Experiment Lists).
- Discussion of existing uses of mixin inheritance

### APS Workshop

- GW had conversation about expanding workshop scope. Was half-day, thought maybe a full day - scope expanded to e.g. serial processing 
- May 4th-8th 2026 two half-days of DIALS workshop probably
- Some travel funding available, potentially from outside US
- Proposal submitted, no reply yet, probably not before Christmas
- AB says RAPID data also approached us about DIALS workshops there

### Other

- Webinars: GW did one yesterday for NSLSII, requests for a couple more...
    - ED, xia2.ssx and stills_process requests
    - JBE happy to approach
    - Chat to DGW about ED
    - Dan nominated by AB to prepare for stills_process
    - GW to email, coordinate
- GW patch to resolve dectris metadata change

- ND to investigate effort required for installer build issue resolution
    - Investigated basic, infrastructure still fails to identify macOS arm, still need to proceed with conda-based installer plan

- xfel regression testing of https://github.com/dials/dials/pull/3062 (cosym performance changes) JBE asking for help please. Also somewhat unrelated, regular failing of CI jobs due to http download errors?
  - We should turn off regression tests
  - Maybe explore gitlab LFS as it works well for xfel-regression



### Requiring Explicit Joint Indexing

- https://github.com/dials/dials/pull/3051
- Objections?
    - None! Merged!

## AOB

- IUCR: AB putting schedule together for DIALS workshop, wondering who is going to be attending, for scheduling speakers. 8am-Noon
    - Need answers by Feb 15th


### Next meeting

Thursday, January 29th, 4pm (GMT), 8am (PST), 10am (CST)
